Journal of Inflammation Research

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/djir20

Special Focus on the Cellular Anti-Inflammatory
Effects of Several Micro-Immunotherapy
Formulations: Considerations Regarding
Intestinal-, Immune-Axis-Related- and Neuronal-
Inflammation Contexts

Camille Jacques & Ilaria Floris

To cite this article: Camille Jacques & Ilaria Floris (2022) Special Focus on the Cellular
Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Several Micro-Immunotherapy Formulations: Considerations
Regarding Intestinal-, Immune-Axis-Related- and Neuronal-Inflammation Contexts, Journal of
Inflammation Research, , 6695-6717, DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S389614

To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614

© 2022 Jacques and Floris.

Published online: 13 Dec 2022.

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 95

View related articles 

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=djir20

Journal of Inflammation Research                                                         

Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research

Open Access Full Text Article

O R I G I N A L  R E S E A R C H

Special Focus on the Cellular Anti-Inflammatory 
Effects of Several Micro-Immunotherapy 
Formulations: Considerations Regarding 
Intestinal-, Immune-Axis-Related- and 
Neuronal-Inflammation Contexts

Camille Jacques

*, Ilaria Floris

*

Preclinical Research Department, Labo’Life France, Nantes, France

*These authors contributed equally to this work 

Correspondence: Camille Jacques, Preclinical Research Department, Labo’Life France, 1 rue François Bruneau, 44000 Nantes, France, Tel +33228444905, 
Email camille.jacques@labolife.com 

Introduction: Chronic inflammation is a pernicious underlying status, well-known for its contribution to the progressive development 
of various diseases. In this regard, Micro-immunotherapy (MI) might be a promising therapeutic strategy. MI employs low doses (LD) 
and ultra-low doses (ULD) of immune regulators in their formulations. In particular, as both IL-1β and TNF-α are often used at ULD 
in MI medicines (MIM), a special emphasis has been made on formulations that include these factors in their compositions.
Methods: Several in vitro models have been employed in order to assess the effects of two unitary MIM consisting of ULD of IL-1β 
and TNF-α (u-MIM-1 and u-MIM-2, respectively), and four complex MIM (c-MIM-1, −2, −3 and −4) characterized by the presence of 
ULD of IL-1β and TNF-α amongst other factors. Thus, we first investigated the anti-inflammatory effects of u-MIM-1 and u-MIM-2 in 
a model of inflamed colon carcinoma cells. In addition, the anti-inflammatory potential of c-MIM-1, −2, −3 and −4, was assessed in 
in vitro models of intestinal and neuronal inflammation.
Results: The results revealed that u-MIM-1 and u-MIM-2 both induced a slight decrease in the levels of IL-1β and TNF-α transcripts. 
Regarding the c-MIMs’ effects, c-MIM-1 displayed the capability to restore the altered transepithelial electrical resistance in inflamed- 
HCoEpiC cells. Moreover, c-MIM-1 also slightly increased the expression of the junction-related protein claudin-1, both at the mRNA 
and protein levels. In addition, our in vitro investigations on c-MIM-2 and c-MIM-3 revealed their immune-modulatory effects in LPS- 
inflamed human monocytes, macrophages, and granulocytes, on the secretion of cytokines such as TNF-α, PGE2, and IL-6. Finally, 
c-MIM-4 restored the cell viability of LPS/IFN-γ-inflamed rat cortical neurons, while reducing the secretion of TNF-α in rat glial cells.
Discussion: Our  results shed  the  light  on  the  potential role  of  these  MIM  formulations in  managing  several chronic  inflammation- 
related conditions.
Keywords: cytokines, low-doses, ultra-low-doses, inflammation, immunotherapy, in vitro

Introduction
Inflammatory  mechanisms  are  part  of  the  normal  body’s  defense  against  aggressions,  however,  when  they  last  for 
prolonged periods of time (months to years), they can induce a chronic inflammatory state that can be detrimental to the 
organism.1 The etiology of such slow and long-lasting inflammation is very heterogeneous, as multiple causes can trigger 
an  over-activation  of  the  immune  system,  inhibiting  at  the  same  time  its  normal  return  to  homeostasis.  Besides  the 
context  of  auto-immune  disorders,  some  of  the  reasons  that  can  perpetuate  a  low-grade  inflammation  could  be:  (i)  the 
organism’s inability to eliminate infectious agents such as bacteria, viruses or parasites, (ii) its prolonged exposure to low 

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 6695–6717                                                     

6695
© 2022 Jacques and Floris. This work is published and licensed by Dove Medical Press Limited. The full terms of this license are available at https://www.dovepress.com/ 
terms.php and incorporate the Creative Commons Attribution – Non Commercial (unported, v3.0) License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/). By accessing 
the work you hereby accept the Terms. Non-commercial uses of the work are permitted without any further permission from Dove Medical Press Limited, provided the work is properly attributed. 
For permission for commercial use of this work, please see paragraphs 4.2 and 5 of our Terms (https://www.dovepress.com/terms.php).

Received: 19 September 2022Accepted: 24 November 2022Published: 13 December 2022Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

levels of chemicals, biochemicals or irritants, (iii) defects in the activation/inactivation mechanisms of the immune cells 
including an inadequate or insufficient resolution of inflammation or (iv), lifestyle stressors such as poor sleep quality or 
nutrition.  If  those  triggers  are  maintained  over  a  long  period  of  time,  they  can  lead  to  chronic  inflammatory-related 
diseases  that  can  involve  many  other  organs  and  tissue  of  the  body  like  the  gut,  driving  inflammatory  bowel  diseases 
(IBD);  the  cardio-vascular  system  (stroke,  atherosclerosis);  the  brain  (depression,  neurodegenerative  diseases);  the 
immune system (auto-immune diseases and cancer); the endocrine-metabolic system (diabetes and obesity).

Numerous treatment strategies have been employed in order to reduce inflammation and immunotherapies are one of 
them.  For  instance,  the  use  of  cytokine-based  therapies  has  been  reported  in  the  management  of  sepsis,  diabetes,  or 
cardiovascular  diseases  with  quite  promising  results.  However,  unwanted  side  effects  still  remain,  probably  due  to  the 
cytokines or immune factors dosages employed. A therapeutic approach that includes micro-immunotherapy (MI) could 
thus be of great interest in order to face such concerns. Indeed, MI medicines (MIM) are immune-factor-based medicines, 
which formulations either encompass a sole active substance (unitary preparations; referred to as u-MIM) or a distinctive 
combination of several ingredients (complex MIM; referred to as c-MIM). These medicines are manufactured in the form 
of sucrose-lactose pillules impregnated with the corresponding active ingredients, for oromucosal administration, and are 
intended  to  be  taken  in  a  fasted  state.  In  this  manner,  the  active  substances  can  reach  the  oral-pharyngeal  mucosal 
immune system,2 as well as the mucosal immune system of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, with their associated lymphoid 
tissues and cell populations of the innate and adaptative immune responses.3  This route of administration will, in turn, 
elicit systemic and local effects, as we could observe in previous published preclinical in vivo studies.4–6

Through their exclusive preparation, MIM aim at gently modulating the expression and the related signaling pathways 
of cytokines and immune factors by providing to the organism these molecules at low doses (LD) and ultra-low doses 
(ULD) (Figure 1). These LD/ULD are expressed in Hahnemannian dilution (CH) or in Korsakovian dilutions (K). LD of 
bioactive  molecules  (ranging  from  3  to  5  CH)  are  used  in  MI  formulations  to  mimic  the  low  doses  occurring  in  the 
organism,7,8 and are employed to induce their own biological effects, stimulating their functions (Figure 1, green part). The 
recently published preclinical study on the unitary interferon-γ (4 CH) indeed shows how, at cellular levels, the drug elicits 

Figure 1 General scheme of the concept of low doses (LD) and ultra-low doses (ULD) in the context of MI supported by the two cited preclinical research studies referring 
to the immune-stimulatory/anti-inflammatory responses elicited by the LD or ULD, respectively. LD of cytokines, ranging from 3 centesimal Hahnemannian (CH) to 5 CH, 
aim at orienting the immune responses towards an immune stimulation, inducing their own biological effect through mimicking the physiological low doses employed in the 
body. The immune-stimulatory effects of IFN-γ (4 CH) have been reported by Jacques et al 2022.7 On the other side of the spectrum, ULD aim at modulating (from 6 CH)/ 
down-regulating  (from  12  CH  and  beyond)  a  response.  For  instance,  the  pro-inflammatory  cytokines  IL-1β  and  TNF-α  employed  at  27  CH,  exerted  anti-inflammatory 
responses (Floris et al 2020).9 The CH numbers represented on the x-axis are the ones employed in the MIM’s formulations studied in the current manuscript. The arrows 
represent the direction of the oriented biological response mediated by the LD/ULD employed in micro-immunotherapy medicines (MIM). Green arrow, Stimulation of 
a biological response; Red arrow, Inhibition of a biological response; Combined Green and Red arrow, Modulation of a biological response.

6696

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

immunostimulatory and co-stimulatory effects on different cell types.7 On the other side, the use of ULD (from 6 CH up to 
30  CH)  employed  in  MI  is  intended  to  modulate  (from  6  CH)  and/or  down-regulate  (from  12  CH  and  beyond)  the 
expression of the concerned active substances (Figure 1, orange part). Interestingly, we previously reported that the two 
unitary medicines (u-MIM) interleukin (IL) 1β (IL-1β) (27 CH) and tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) (27 CH) displayed 
anti-inflammatory properties, as they both exhibit the potential to inhibit the secretion of IL-1β and TNF-α, in a model of 
human  primary monocytes as  well as in  THP-1 cells, after  lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure (Figure 2A, blue box).9 

Figure 2 (A) The rationale of the present study is based on the fact that ULD of IL-1β and TNF-α are employed in the tested MI medicines (MIM). The anti-inflammatory 
role of these cytokines, when used at 27 CH, under the respective form of unitary MIM (u-MIM) has been reported by Floris et al 2020,9 and Jacques et al 2021,11 in a model 
of inflamed-immune cells (blue box) consisting of LPS-inflamed human primary monocytes and THP-1 cells. In the current study, the effects of these u-MIM were appraised in 
an intestinal model of inflammation (red box; see Results Section 1., for the results). (B) Scheme recapitulating the overall organization of the present manuscript regarding 
the four complex-MIM (c-MIM) studied. The formulation of each c-MIM is detailed. As each c-MIM formulation was tested in a particular context, the corresponding Results’ 
sections within this manuscript are reported at the bottom of each colored box (red box, intestinal inflammation model; blue box, inflamed-immune-cells model; yellow box, 
neuronal  inflammation  model).  The  arrows  represent  the  direction  of  the  oriented  biological  response  mediated  by  the  LD/ULD  employed  in  micro-immunotherapy 
medicines (MIM). Green arrow, Stimulation of a biological response; Red arrow, Modulation/inhibition of a biological response; Combined Green and Red arrow, Modulation 
of a biological response; K, Korsakovian dilution.

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6697

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

Moreover, other in vitro and in vivo preclinical data have demonstrated the anti-inflammatory properties of a MI formula-
tion employing ULD of TNF-α and IL-1β in association with other immune regulators,4,10,11 providing encouraging results 
about the potential of some MIM in slowing down the pro-inflammatory responses in the context of chronic inflammation. 
Based on these previous results, the first aim of this study was to assess the effects of these two ULD-based u-MIMs in 
another specific inflammatory context, an intestinal inflammation model (Figure 2A, red box).

In  contrast  to  unitary  preparations,  complex  MI  formulations  consist  of  a  unique  association  of  active  substances, 
thought to act synergistically in order to coherently channel a specific biological response. The second aim of this study 
was to conduct a complementary assessment of the effects of four c-MIM (referred to as c-MIM-1, c-MIM-2, c-MIM-3 
and c-MIM-4 in this manuscript), as they all employ ULD of IL-1β and TNF-α in their formulations, in association with 
additional  actives  at  LD/ULD.  c-MIM-1  also  includes  ULD  of  IL-8  and  LD  of  IL-10;  c-MIM-2  includes  ULD  of 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and IL-6, with LD of IL-10, too; c-MIM-3 uses ULD of IL-6, IL-13 and oncostatin M (OSM), 
as well as LD of tumor growth factor β (TGF-β) and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra). Finally, c-MIM-4 employs ULD 
of IL-6 and IL-12 as well as LD of IL-4 (Figure 2B).

It  is  now  well-recognized  that  chronic  inflammation  triggers  a  whole-body  response  and  the  activation  of  many 
feedback loops with interconnected effects.12  Moreover, as an integrated and complex system, the different anatomical 
parts of the body communicate between them. Considering the particularly close relationship between the epithelial cells 
from the gut, the immunity and the nervous system,13  the main purpose of this study was indeed to assess the potential 
anti-inflammatory  properties  of  four  different  complex  MIM’s  (c-MIM)  formulations  in  several  inflammatory  contexts 
related to the (i) -intestinal tract (Figure 2B, red box), (ii) -immune axis (Figure 2B, blue box) and (iii) -nervous system 
(Figure 2B, yellow box), depending on their specific cytokines combination. The further paragraphs of this introduction 
will  provide  brief  non-exhaustive  detail  about  the  role  of  each  cytokine  in  the  three  above-mentioned  contexts,  thus 
explaining the deliberate choice to assess each c-MIM in a particular inflammatory model in the first place.

Recent literature delineated the importance of IL-8 and IL-10 in the molecular mechanisms driving GI inflammatory 
diseases.14,15 The fact that c-MIM-1 includes ULD of IL-8 and LD of IL-10 in its formulation thus motivated the choice 
of assessing the cellular effects of this medicine in an in vitro model of intestinal inflammation (Figure 2B, red box).

In a more general approach, c-MIM-2 and c-MIM-3 have been investigated in vitro, on the immune axis in different 
cell types and inflamed experimental contexts (Figure 2B, blue box). These two formulations employ ULD of IL-1β and 
TNF-α in association with ULD of PGE2, or ULD of IL-6, IL-13, and OSM, and LD of IL-10, or LD of TGF-β and IL- 
1Ra. Numerous publications, nicely put together in the review from Tsuge et al indeed reported the major role played by 
PGE2 in the mediation of inflammation and immune diseases, notably through its implication in mechanisms related to 
Th1 differentiation, and Th1/Th17/Th22 signaling.16  In the context of immunity, IL-10 is produced by a broad type of 
myeloid  and  lymphoid  cells  during  infections,  and  suppresses  macrophages  and  dendritic  cells  functions,  thereby 
impeding Th1 and  Th2  effector responses.17  In  immune effector cell types, and  in a wide  range of  established models 
of chronic inflammation, IL-10 is reported to play a central role in the regulation of homeostasis.18 On another side, TGF- 
β is  important  in  maintaining the  T cell  tolerance to  self  or  innocuous  environmental  antigens.19  IL-1 is  known  for  its 
crucial  involvement  in  the  onset  and/or  the  etiopathogenesis  of  several  inflammatory-mediated  diseases.  Given  its 
importance,  several  therapeutic  approaches  consisting  of  the  use  of  IL-Ra  have  been  used  in  clinical  practice  to  block 
the activity of IL-1.20  OSM is a pleiotropic cytokine playing important roles  in a wide range of homeostatic functions 
(such as hematopoiesis, bone/fat turnover, liver regeneration) and, under chronic inflammatory diseases, it may play pro- 
inflammatory  roles,  depending  on  the  microenvironment  and  the  interested  tissue,  without  being  overexpressed  at 
systemic  levels.21  IL-6  is  also  a  pleiotropic  cytokine  playing  important  roles  in  hematopoiesis,  bone  metabolism 
embryonic  development,  immunity,  and  host  responses.  Its  expression  is  finely  regulated  at  multiple  levels,  and  when 
a dysregulated and persistent IL-6 expression occurs, it may lead to the development of various inflammatory-mediated 
diseases.22,23  Similarly,  IL-13  is  known  to  exert  pleiotropic  effects  and  to  be  involved  in  inflammatory-mediated 
diseases.24

Finally, in the case of c-MIM-4, which employs ULD of both IL-6 and IL-12 in its formulation, as well as IL-4 at LD, 
one  of  the  goals  of  this  study  was  to  assess  its  effects  using  an  in  vitro  preclinical  model  of  neuronal  inflammation 
(Figure 2B, yellow box). The rationale behind the choice of the neuronal-inflammation context was supported by a rich 

6698

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

bibliography,  illustrated  by  the  following  examples.  For  instance,  according  to  the  results  of  a  recent  meta-analysis, 
patients suffering from depressive symptoms express higher levels of IL-6.25  Another study also reported that the IL-12 
serum  levels  of  patients  with  major  depression  were  significantly  higher  than  healthy  controls,  and  that  an  8-weeks 
treatment led to a reduction of these levels.26 On the other hand, it was suggested that IL-4 could modulate IL-1β-induced 
depressive behavior in rats, by inhibiting IL-1β-induced central glial activation and neurotransmitter alterations.27

Materials and Methods
Tested Item and Experimental Control
The tested MIMs are homeopathic medicinal products consisting of sucrose-lactose pillules impregnated with ethanolic 
preparations  of  cytokines.  These MIMs  were  manufactured  by  Labo’Life  España,  as  previously  described,6,7  and  have 
been provided for investigational purposes. The two u-MIM under investigation in this study (referred as u-MIM-1 and 
u-MIM-2)  are  presented  as  unitary  medicines,  while  the  four  tested  complex  capsules  (c-MIM-1,  c-MIM-2,  c-MIM-3, 
and  c-MIM-4)  are  made  of  a  specific  combination  of  either  four,  five  or  seven  different  ingredients  (Figure  2).  Their 
composition is characterized by cytokines and immune factors and their amount is expressed in CH or in K.

The  Veh.  pillules  used  in  the  study  as  controls  are  manufactured  by  Labo’Life  Belgium.  Previous  publications 
described how these vehicle controls are produced, in order to provide a suitable control for preclinical research.4,6,7,9,10 
Regarding  the  in  vitro  experiments  performed  in  the  current  study,  u-MIM,  c-MIM  or  the  Veh.  pillules  were  freshly 
diluted in 100 mL of culture medium to reach the final sucrose-lactose concentration of 11 mM.

Cell Lines
HT-29- cells, a human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line with epithelial morphology was used in this study. This cell 
line  was  purchased  from  the  ATCC  (ATCC®  HTB-38™,  Molsheim,  France)  and  was  grown  in  Dulbecco’s  Modified 
Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) with high glucose (4.5 g/L) containing 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) (DMEM 10% FCS, PAA 
Laboratories,  Les  Mureaux,  France)  and  antibiotics  (streptomycin  100  μg/mL  and  penicillin  100  units/mL,  Sigma 
Aldrich, St. Quentin Fallavier, France). Cells were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2  and 95% relative humidity.

To  induce  inflammatory  conditions,  a  pre-stimulation  of  cells  by  TNF-α  (ref  #  39–8329-60/E08250-1633, 
eBioscience) at 10 ng/mL was performed for 3 hours. The tested Veh. and MIMs were then added to the culture medium 
containing  the  TNF-α  for  24  more  hours  before  an  extensive  wash,  and  harvested  for  mRNA  extraction.  Supernatants 
(SN) were collected to perform cytokine quantification by ELISA.

Evaluation of Gene Expression by RT-qPCR
Total  mRNA was  isolated  from  cells  using  Rneasy  kit  (Macherey  Nagel,  Hoerdt,  France)  according  to  the  manufac-
turer’s instructions. RNA quantification was performed using spectrophotometry. After treatment  at 37°C for 30  min 
with  20–50  units  of  RNase-free  DNase  I  (Roche  Diagnostics  Corporation,  Indianapolis,  IN,  USA),  oligo-dT  primers 
(Roche  Diagnostics  Corporation,  Indianapolis,  USA),  the  High-Capacity  cDNA  Reverse  Transcription  Kit  (Applied 
Biosystems,  Waltham,  MA,  USA)  was  used  to  synthesize  single-stranded  cDNA.  The  mRNA was  quantified  using 
SYBR  green  Master  Mix  (Applera,  Courtaboeuf,  France)  with  human-specific  oligonucleotides  in  a  GeneAmp 
Abiprism 7000 (Applera). In each assay, calibrated and no-template controls were included. Each sample was run in 
triplicate.  SYBR  green  dye  intensity  was  analyzed  using  the  Abiprism  7000  SDS  software  (Applera,  Courtaboeuf, 
France). All results were normalized to the unaffected housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(GAPDH).

All the results are expressed as a fold of the mean of activation of duplicate/mean of duplicate in medium alone or 
TNF-α alone. The primers sequences used are the following: GAPDH: Forward (F): 5’-GAC ACC CAC TCC TCC ACC 
TTT-3’;  Reverse  (R):  5’-TTG  CTG  TAG  CCA  AAT  TCG  TTG  T-3’;  TNF-α:  F:5’-CAG  GAC  GTG  GAG  CTG  GCC 
GAG GAG −3’; R: 5’- CAC CAG CTG GTT ATC TCT CAG CTC −3’; IL-1β: F: 5’- GAT GCA CCT GTA CGA TCA 
CT-3’; R: 5’-GAT GCA CCT GTA CGA TCA CT −3’.

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6699

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

Inflamed Colon Epithelial Intestinal Cells Model
Phytohemagglutinin-Stimulated Human Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cell’ Supernatants Production
Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from healthy adult volunteer donors were isolated by centrifugation 
of  venous  blood  on  Ficoll-Hypaque  density  gradients  (Amersham  Pharmacia  Biotech,  Piscataway,  NJ,  USA).  Healthy 
volunteers were enrolled by the Blood Bank Center (Etablissement Français du Sang, EFS, Pays de Loire, France). All 
blood  samples  were  approved  by  the  Ethics  committee  of  the  EFS  Blood  Bank  Center  with  written  informed  consent 
obtained  for  all  the  donors,  in  accordance  with  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki.  Cells  (105/mL)  were  cultured  in  24-well 
round-bottom  plates  in  2  mL  of  complete  medium  and  stimulated  with  phytohemagglutinin  (PHA)  (5  µg/mL)  for  48 
hours. The SN were collected and stored at −80°C until use.

Trans-Epithelial Resistance Assessment in Human Colonic Epithelial Cells
Human Colonic Epithelial Cells (HCoEpiC) were purchased from Innoprot, Bizkaia, Spain. The cells were seeded at the 
density of 5×105 cells in 24-well plate inserts whose diameter is 6.5 mm and the membrane area 0.3 cm2 and grown until 
tight confluence. The cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 2 mM L-glutamine, and antibiotics. 
The  trans-epithelial  resistance  (TEER)  measurements  were  obtained  as  Ω/cm2  and  performed  with  a  Millicell®  ERS-2 
device  at  different  incubation  times  (24  hours  and  72  hours),  in  the  presence/absence  of  the  PBMC  SN,  with/without 
c-MIM-4  or  Veh.  added  30  minutes  before  reading.  The  measurements  were  performed  in  HBSS  without  phenol  red 
(Sigma-Aldrich, ref # H6648), adding 600 µL HBSS in the basolateral area and 100 µL of HBSS in the apical area for 30 
minutes.  After  this  time,  readings  in  3  individual  wells  (n  =  3)  were  made.  10  mM  of  sodium  caprate  (C10)  (Sigma- 
Aldrich, ref # C4151) was used as a positive control.

Claudin-1 Expression Assessment in Human Colonic Epithelial Cells
HCoEpiC cells were seeded at a density of 500.000 cells/well in 6 well plates and grown until confluence. HCoEpiC cells 
were treated with or without Veh. or c-MIM-1 for 24 h. After that, 400 μL of human PBMC SN previously activated with 
PHA during 48 h was added to each well for 30 minutes. After treatments, the cells were collected and divided into two 
parts, one part was used for mRNA isolation and the other part for protein extraction.

Evaluation of the Claudin-1 Expression by Real-Time qPCR
For  quantitative  reverse  transcriptase-PCR  assays,  total  RNA  (1  µg)  was  retrotranscribed  using  the  iScript  cDNA 
Synthesis Kit  (Ref #1708891,  Bio-Rad,  Hercules,  CA,  USA)  and  the cDNA was  analyzed  by real-time  PCR  using the 
iQTM  SYBR  Green  Supermix  (Ref  #1708880,  Bio-Rad)  and  a  CFX96  Real-time  PCR  Detection  System  (Bio-Rad). 
GAPDH gene expression was used to standardize mRNA expression in each sample. Gene expression is quantified using 
the 2−ΔΔCt  method and the percentage of relative expression against controls (untreated cells) was represented. Primers 
for use in real-time PCR analysis: Claudin-1: F: 5’-AGG TCT GGC GAC ATT AGT GG-3’; R: 5’-CGT GGT GTT GGG 
TAA GAG GT-3’; GAPDH: F: 3’-TGG CAA AGT GGA GAT TGT TGC C-3’; R: 5’-AAG ATG GTG ATG GGC TTC 
CCG-3’.

Evaluation of the Claudin-1 Expression by Western Blot
The cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and proteins were extracted in 50 μL of lysis buffer (50 mM 
Tris–HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, and 1% NP-40) supplemented with 10 mM NaF, 1 mM Na3VO4, 10 μg/ 
mL leupeptin, 1 μg/mL pepstatin and aprotinin, and 1 μL/mL phenylmethyl sulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) saturated. Twenty  
micrograms of protein were boiled at 95°C in Laemmli buffer and electrophoresed in 10% SDS/PAGE gels. Separated 
proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (20V for 30 min) and blocked in tris-buffered 
saline  (TBS)  solution  containing  0.1%  Tween  20  and  5%  non-fat  dry  milk  for  1 hour  at  room  temperature. 
Immunodetection of specific proteins was carried out by incubation with a primary antibody rabbit anti-Cldn-1 (1:200, 
Ref: #ab15098, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and β-actin (1:10.000 dilution, Ref: #A5316, Sigma), overnight, at 4°C. After 
washing  membranes,  horseradish  peroxidase-conjugated  secondary  antibody  was  added  and  detected  by 
a  chemiluminescence  system  (GE  Healthcare  Europe  GmbH,  Freiburg,  Germany).  The  quantification  of  the  Blot’s 
pictures, was performed thanks to the online version of the ImageJ software (downloaded on the 2nd of May 2022).

6700

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

Immunomodulation in Immune Cells
Immunomodulation in Human Monocytes
Human primary monocytes were prepared from buffy coats of three healthy human blood donors. All blood samples were 
approved  by  the  Ethics  committee  of  the  EFS  Blood  Bank  Center  with  written  informed  consent  obtained  for  all  the 
donors.  Cells  were  seeded  in  24-well  plates  at  a  density  of  2.200.000  cells/well  for  ELISA  measurements.  Monocytes 
were incubated with LPS (10 ng/mL, Salmonella typhimurium SL1181) for 30 min before treatment with either the Veh., 
or c-MIM-2 for an additional 24 hours. After 24 hours, SN were collected, centrifuged, and investigated for IL-1β, TNF- 
α and PGE2 concentrations in ELISA using the manufacturer’s protocol (n = 6, 3 different donors).

Immunomodulation in Human Macrophages
Human  CD14+  monocytes  were  isolated  from  the  blood  of  a  healthy  donor  (67  years  old  man).  The  blood  sample 
collection was approved by the Ethics committee of the EFS Blood Bank Center. After the mononuclear cells’ isolation 
by  the  Ficoll  gradient  centrifugation  method,  the  CD14+  cells  were  selected  by  positive  selection  thanks  to  magnetic 
beads (MACS®  Miltenyi Biotec B.V. and Co. KG, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany). Monocytes were then cultivated for 6 
days  in  24-well  plates,  with  α-MEM  medium  supplemented  with  10%  fetal  bovine  serum  (FBS)  and  100  ng/mL 
macrophage  colony-stimulating  factor  (M-CSF)  (R&D  Systems,  Inc.,  Minneapolis,  MN,  USA,  Ref:  #216-MC).  After 
these 6 days in culture, the medium was replaced with α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 50 ng/mL M-CSF in 
addition to 100 ng/mL LPS (Sigma, Ref: #L4391) and either the Veh. or c-MIM-3. The treatments were applied for 24 
hours and each condition was performed in triplicate. At the end of the incubation period, SN were collected, aliquoted, 
and  stored  at  −80°C  until  ELISA  assay  (human  IL-6  Quantikine,  R&D  Systems).  Optic  density  was  measured  on 
a  spectrophotometer  Multiskan  Go  and  the  Skanlt  3.2  software  was  used  to  quantify  the  measured  cytokine 
concentrations.

Immunomodulation in Human Granulocytes
Human primary granulocytes were freshly isolated from the blood of a healthy donor obtained from the EFS, and seeded 
in 48-well plates in optimized RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% inactivated FBS. Cells were then pre-incubated with 
either  Veh.,  or  c-MIM-3  for  one  hour,  before  the  addition  of  LPS  (1  µg/mL)  as  the  inflammation  inducer  within  the 
media. Cells were then incubated for 18 hours in presence of the tested items and LPS. All the experimental conditions 
were  performed  in  triplicate.  At  the  end  of  the  total  incubation  period,  SN  were  collected  and  the  assessed  cytokines 
levels  were  evaluated.  The  IL-6  and  IL-1β  levels  were  evaluated  by  multiplex  CBATM  method  following  the  provider 
recommendations  (Human  IL-6  Flex  Set;  BDTM  Biosciences,  A7  beads,  Ref:  #558276;  dilution  factor  1:5  and  Human 
IL-1β Flex Set; BDTM  Biosciences, B4 beads, Ref: #558279).

Immunomodulation in Neurons
Ethics Statement
All  animal  procedures  were  carried  out  in  strict  adherence  to  the  European  Community  Council  Directive  of 
September  22,  2010  (2010/63/UE).  All  experiments  and  protocols  were  authorized  and  approved  by  the  French 
Ministry  of  Research,  as  well  as  by  the  Animal  Welfare  Committees  of  Amylgen,  Biotrial,  QPS  and  Neuronexperts. 
All efforts were made to minimize the number of animals used.

Cortical Neurons Culture
Rat cortical neurons were cultured as described by Singer et al28  Briefly, a pregnant female rat of 15 days gestation was 
sacrificed by CO2  inhalation (Wistar; Janvier Lab, Le Genest-Saint-Isle, France) and the fetuses were removed from the 
uterus.  The  cortexes  were  removed  and  placed  in  ice-cold  medium  of  Leibovitz  (L15,  Panbiotech  GmbH,  Aidenbach, 
Germany, Ref: #P04-27055 batch: 8940719) containing 2% of penicillin/streptomycin (PS, PanBiotech Ref: #P06-07100, 
batch:  2791019)  and  bovine  serum  albumin  (BSA,  Panbiotech  Ref:  #P06-1391100,  batch:  H190110).  Cortexes  were 
dissociated  by  trypsin-EDTA  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific,  Illkirch-Graffenstaden,  France  Ref:  #25300-054,  batch: 
2027082)  for  20  min  at  37°C.  The  reaction  was  stopped  by  the  addition  of  DMEM  (Panbiotech  Ref:  #P04-03600, 
batch:1220919) containing DNAase I grade II (0.1 mg/mL; PanBiotech, Ref: #P60-37780100, batch: H181015) and 10% 

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6701

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

FCS (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA, Ref: #10270106, batch: 42G2082K). Cells were then mechanically dissociated by 
3 passages through a 10 mL pipette. Cells were then centrifuged at 290 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The SN was discarded and 
the cell pellet was re-suspended in a culture medium for neurons consisting of Neurobasal (Invitrogen, Ref: #11570556, 
batch:  2161553)  supplemented  with  2%  of  B27  (Invitrogen,  Ref:  #11530536,  batch:  2181375),  2  mM  of  L-glutamine 
(L-glut; PanBiotech, Ref: #P04-80100, batch: 1640518), 2% of PS solution, 1% of FCS and 10 ng/mL of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF, Peprotech France, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, Ref #450-02, batch 31961). Viable cells were 
counted in a Neubauer cytometer using the trypan blue exclusion test. The cells were seeded at a density of 30.000 cells/ 
well  in  96  well-plates  (Falcon,  ref:  353072)  pre-coated  with  poly-D-lysine  (10  µg/mL;  Sigma,  ref:  P7886,  batch: 
SLBS8705) in H2O culture (PanBiotech ref: P04-991000, batch: 2900219) and were cultured at 37°C in a humidified air 
(95%)/CO2  (5%) atmosphere.

Preparation of Astrocytes and Microglial Cell and Culture with Cortical Neurons
One vial of rat glial cells (4.000.000 cells by vial at passage 2) was thawed and cells were seeded at the density of 12.000 
cells per cm² on 75 cm² flask (Nunc ref: 055403) in DMEM supplemented with 2 mM of L-glutamine, 2% of PS solution 
and 10% of FCS. After 5 days of culture, the mix of astrocytes/microglial cells was dissociated by trypsin-EDTA for 20 
min at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of DMEM, containing DNAase I grade II (0.1 mg/mL) and 10% 
FCS. Cells were then centrifuged at 290 × g for 10 min at 4°C temperature. The cell pellet was re-suspended in a culture 
medium for neurons. Glial cells were seeded at the same time as the neurons at a density of 20.000 cells per well.

Compound Incubation and LPS/IFN-γ Treatment
After  8  days  of  coculture,  cells  were  treated  with  either  Veh.,  c-MIM-2,  or  MK801  (Sigma  ref:  M107,  batch: 
105M4606V)  at  20  µM  in  medium  for  neurons.  After  9  days  of  coculture,  cells  were  treated  with  or  without  the 
combination of LPS (100 ng/mL, Sigma ref: L2630, batch: 089M4016V)/IFN-γ (10 ng/mL, Peprotech ref: 315–05, batch: 
061798) during 24 hours,29–31  and with or without the tested items or MK801 in 300 µL of medium for neuron. At the 
end of this 24 hours incubation, SN were recovered and frozen for quantification of TNF-α released. Cortical neurons and 
glial cells were incubated in a medium for neurons with and without the tested items for an additional 48 hours to analyze 
the survival of neurons. Six independent wells were done per culture condition.

Quantification of Neuronal Cells Survival After Glial Cells LPS/INF-γ Activation
After 72 hours of glial cells LPS/INF-γ activation, cells were fixed by a solution of 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma, ref: 
6148, batch: SZBE2390V) for 20 min at room temperature, and control conditions were also fixed according to the same 
procedure. The cells were then permeabilized and non-specific sites were blocked with a solution of PBS (PanBiotech; 
ref: P04-36500, batch: 5081219) containing 0.1% of saponin (Sigma; ref: S7900, batch: BCBL8667V) and 1% FCS for 
15  min  at  room  temperature.  Cells  were  incubated  overnight  at  4°C,  with  a  monoclonal  anti-microtubule  associated 
protein  2  antibodies  produced  in  mice  (MAP-2,  1/5000,  Sigma;  ref:  M4403,  batch:  063M4802),  in  a  solution  of  PBS 
containing 1%  FCS  and 0.1% saponin.  Antibody against  MAP-2 stains specifically  neuron cell  body and  neurite. This 
antibody  was  revealed  with  an  Alexa  Fluor  488  goat  anti-mouse  IgG  (1/400,  Molecular  probe,  ref:  A11001,  batch: 
2140660)  in  PBS  with  1%  FCS  and  0.1%  saponin,  for  1  hour,  at  room  temperature.  Nuclei  of  cells  were  labeled  by 
a fluorescent marker (Hoechst solution, Sigma; ref: B1155, batch: 046M4048V) in the same solution. For each condition, 
20  pictures  per  well  were  taken  using  InCell  Analyzer  2200  (GE  Healthcare)  with  20x  magnification.  Images  of  each 
culture well were taken in the same conditions. Analysis of cell bodies of MAP-2 positive neurons was performed using 
Developer  software  (GE  Healthcare).  A  total  of  6  data  per  experimental  condition  were  provided.  All  values  are 
expressed as mean ± s.e.m.

Quantification of Cytokine Release by ELISA
The  culture  SN  were  thawed  and  100  µL  by  well  were  used  to  quantified  by  ELISA  the  level  of  TNF-α  (TNF-α  rat 
ELISA  kit,  Fisher  Scientific,  ref:  KRC3011,  batch  218247–002)  released  by  glial  cells  in  the  media,  according  to  the 
manufacturer’s instructions. All values are expressed as mean ± SD.

6702

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

Statistical Analysis
The graphs in the figures were performed with GraphPad Prism, Version 9.4 for Windows (GraphPad Software Inc., San 
Diego California USA, updated on 16/06/2022). Authors have followed the recent recommendations of D.L. Vaux that 
encourage performing descriptive statistics instead to make statistical inferences when the number of independent values 
is small.32 Indeed, no statistical inference has been performed to analyze the results of the in vitro studies presented here.

Results
IL-1β (27 CH) and TNF-α (27 CH), Both Unitary Micro-Immunotherapy Medicines, 
Slightly Reduced the Expression of IL-1β and TNF-α at Transcriptional Levels in TNF- 
α-Inflamed HT-29 Cells
Previous  results  reported  the  anti-inflammatory  effects  of  the  u-MIM  IL-1β  (27  CH)  and  TNF-α  (27  CH)  in  human 
primary monocytes and in the THP-1 cell line.9 In this study, we wanted to assess the effect of these unitaries in a model 
of intestinal inflammation, by using a human epithelial colon cancer cell line exposed to TNF-α. Therefore, the effect of 
IL-1β (27 CH) and TNF-α (27 CH) was evaluated in HT-29 cells, inflamed by a 3 hours pre-incubation with 10 ng/mL 
TNF-α (Figure 3A). The cells were then treated with either the vehicle (Veh.), IL-1β (27 CH) or TNF-α (27 CH) for 24 
hours  before  assessing  the  transcripts’  expression  of  IL-1β  and  TNF-α  by  RT-qPCR.  The  results  are  presented  in 

Figure 3 IL-1β (27 CH) and TNF-α (27 CH) tend to decrease the expression of both IL-1β and TNF-α at transcriptional levels, in a model of intestinal inflammation. (A) 
Representative scheme of the experimental protocol. HT-29 cells were pre-treated for 3 hours with 10 ng/mL TNF-α as an inflammatory trigger before the incubation with 
either the Veh., IL-1β (27 CH), or TNF-α (27 CH) during the next 24 hours. RT-qPCR analysis was performed at the end of the incubation period. (B and C) Expression of 
IL-1β and TNF-α at the transcriptional level, in presence of TNF-α (10 ng/mL) as an inflammation inducer and after a 24 hours incubation with either Veh., IL-1β (27 CH) or 
TNF-α  (27 CH). The experiment has been done once and the means ± SD of three technical replicates are illustrated on the graph. The expression of glyceraldehyde- 
3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) was used as an internal normalizer. The black dotted lines highlight the effect of the two tested u-MIM compared with the Veh.

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6703

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

Figure  3B  and  C,  and  the  control  (Ct)  conditions  showed  that  the  mRNA  expression  of  both  of  the  cytokines  was 
increased  after  TNF-α  stimulation  (Figure  3,  white  vs  red  histograms).  A  decrease  of  more  than  two-fold  in  IL-1β 
expression was obtained after IL-1β (27 CH) treatment compared with the Veh. (Figure 3, grey vs orange histograms). In 
addition,  a  decrease  in  TNF-α  expression  of  about  two-fold  too  was  also  observed  in  the  same  treatment  conditions. 
Similar  response  patterns  towards  a  down-regulation  were  observed  after  treatment  with  the  other  u-MIM,  TNF-α  (27 
CH)  (Figure  3,  grey  vs  yellow  histograms).  Considering  these  interesting  trends,  the  following  sections  of  this  study 
aimed  at  evaluating  the  anti-inflammatory  properties  of  several  complex  MIM-containing  ULD  of  IL-1β  and  TNF-α 
within their formulations.

c-MIM-1 Could Restore the Transepithelial Resistance in a Cellular Model of Intestinal 
Inflammation
The  integrity  of  the  intestinal  barrier  is  fundamental  to  maintain  healthy  gut  homeostasis,  as  well  as  physiological 
intestinal permeability. It is widely known that, under chronic inflammation, intestinal homeostasis is altered, resulting in 
an impairment of the barrier functions and thus, an increase in intestinal permeability.33  In order to induce an intestinal 
inflammation status in vitro, human HCoEpiC cells were exposed to supernatants (SN) derived from phytohemagglutinin 
(PHA)-treated PBMCs, which have been reported to be concentrated in pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-8 
and IL-17.34  The resistance of the epithelial barrier is one of the characteristics that reflects the intestinal permeability 
and the interactions’ strength between epithelial cells. As a consequence, any disruption within these epithelial interac-
tions  ultimately  creates  a  so-called  “leakage”  in  the  barrier,  leading  to  the  symptoms  related  to  inflammatory  bowel 
diseases.  Transepithelial  electrical  resistance  (TEER)  measurements,  expressed  in  Ω/cm,2  were  performed  with  a  -
Millicell®  ERS-2  device,  after  either  a  24-hours  or  a  72-hours  incubation  period,  with/without  PHA-treated-PBMCs 
SN, with/without either the Veh. or c-MIM-1, added 30 minutes before the SN (Figure 4A). 10 mM of sodium caprate 
(C10)  was  used  as  a  positive  inducer  of  the  epithelial  barrier  disruption  and  served  as  an  internal  control  attesting  the 
relevance of the model. The results in presence of PHA-treated PBMCs SN incubated for 24 and 72 hours are presented 
in Figure 4B and C, respectively.

As expected, the C10 stimulation alone decreased the TEER compared with the untreated control (Figure 4B and C, 
red histograms vs white  histograms). Similarly,  SN from PBMCs activated  with PHA, also  led to a  decrease in TEER 
compared with the untreated HCoEpiC cells (Figure 4B and C, orange histograms vs white histograms), thus confirming 
here the relevance of these SN as a pro-inflammatory stimulus.

Interestingly,  c-MIM-1  protected  the  epithelial  cells  against  the  PHA-stimulated  PBMCs  SN-induced  disruption 
(Figure  4B,  pink  histogram  vs  yellow  histogram),  after  24  hours.  Regarding  the  TEER  results  obtained  at  72  hours, 
c-MIM-1  effects  appear  to  be  transient,  as  these  protective  effects,  almost  disappeared  (Figure  4C  pink  histogram  vs 
yellow  histogram).  The  results  derived  from  three  independent  experiments  provide  for  the  first  time,  indications  of 
a potential effect of the c-MIM-1 formulation towards the protection of the epithelial barrier in an inflammatory context 
in vitro.

The  effect  of  c-MIM-1  was  assessed  in  human  HCoEpiC  cells  in  absence  of  inflammation,  too.  As  shown  in 
Supplementary  Figure  S1,  c-MIM-1  does  not  alter  the  barrier  permeability  compared  to  the  control  (Ct),  rather  it 
seems  that  c-MIM-1  has  restored  the  resistance  and  has  strengthened  the  epithelial  barrier  at  24  hours  in  comparison 
with the Veh., which has induced a small TEER decrease.

c-MIM-1 Slightly Increased Claudin-1 Expression in a Cellular Model of Intestinal 
Inflammation
In  light  of  the  previous  encouraging  results,  we  wanted  to  investigate  if  the  tested  medicine  could  modulate  the 
expression  of  one  of  the  proteins  present  within  the  tight  junctions,  involved  in  the  regulation  of  the  epithelial  barrier 
permeability. Indeed, claudin-1 is widely expressed in the intestinal epithelium and plays an important role in maintain-
ing intestinal barrier integrity.35  Briefly, HCoEpiC cells were treated with either the Veh. or c-MIM-1 for 24 hours, and 
SN from PHA-treated PBMCs were then added for an additional 30 minutes incubation. The cells were then harvested 

6704

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

Figure  4  C-MIM-1  displays  a  protective  effect  against  intestinal  permeability  in  a  model  of  intestinal  cells  inflamed  with  phytohemagglutinin  (PHA)-stimulated  PBMCs 
supernatants (SN). (A) Representative scheme of the experimental protocol. In the upper panel, the production of the PHA-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs) supernatants (SN) is illustrated. The lower panel shows the evaluation of the effect of c-MIM-1 on the transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) in a model of 
HCoEpiC cells. FCS, fetal calf serum; HBSS, Hanks’ balanced salt solution. Briefly, PBMCs from healthy adult volunteers’ donors were isolated by Ficoll-Hypaque density 
gradients and the cells were seeded in 24-well round-bottom plates and stimulated with PHA (5 µg/mL) for 48 hours. At the end of the incubation period, the SN containing 
pro-inflammatory cytokines were harvested. In parallel, HCoEpiC cells were grown in 24-well plate inserts until tight confluence. Cells were either not treated (Ct), treated 
with Veh. or treated with c-MIM-1 for 30 min before media replacement with either regular DMEM media or PHA-stimulated PBMCs SN during the next 24 hours or 72 
hours. 30 minutes before the TEER measurement, the media was replaced with HBSS without phenol red alone in the basolateral area, in the apical chamber. Each condition 
has been measured in 3 individual wells (n = 3) and a condition in which C10 alone was incubated was used as a positive control for the induction of the epithelial disruption. 
(B and C) Effect of c-MIM-1 on HCoEpiC TEER after 24 or 72 hours of stimulation with PHA-induced PBMCs SN. Raw data were provided as the measures of the Ω/cm² for 
each  triplicate,  and  were  then  expressed  as  percentages  of  the  control  conditions,  set  as  100%.  Each  histogram  illustrating  the  mean  ±  SD  obtained  for each  assessed 
condition, in 3 independent experiments. The black dotted lines highlight the effect of c-MIM-1 compared with Veh.

and  mRNA  and  protein  samples  were  extracted  for  claudin-1  expression  analysis.  The  results  of  the  RT-qPCR  are 
presented  in  Figure  5A  and  the  results  from  the  Western  Blots  are  illustrated  in  Figure  5B.  Overall,  in  inflammatory 
conditions, the Veh. did not modulate the claudin-1 expression at the mRNA level, compared with the SN from the PHA- 
treated PBMCs condition. However, when the cells were treated with c-MIM-1, a slight increase (of about 20%) in the 
claudin-1  expression  was  observed.  In  addition,  according  to  the  Western  Blot  quantization,  this  trend  tended  to  be 
confirmed at the protein level, in a similar range of increase. Such results were also observed without any inflammatory 
stimulus (Supplementary Figure S2).

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6705

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

Figure 5 C-MIM-1 slightly increases the expression of claudin-1 in a cellular model of intestinal inflammation. (A) The expression of claudin-1 was assessed by RT-qPCR in 
the HCoEpiC cells, after 24 hours of treatment with either the Veh. or c-MIM-1 and stimulation with the supernatant (SN) from PBMCs treated with PHA (5µg/mL) for 30 
min. The claudin-1 expression has been normalized by the one of the housekeeping gene GAPDH, and the control conditions, without any treatment, have been set at 1. The 
experiment has been done once; each condition was performed in triplicate. (B) The relative expression of claudin-1 at protein level has been assessed by Western Blot in 
the same cellular conditions as above. The expression of β-actin has been used as a housekeeping gene for the protein expression. The claudin-1/β-actin ratios are presented 
in PHA-stimulated PBMCs SN conditions, respectively, after quantization of the Blot’s pictures, using the online ImageJ software (downloaded on the 2nd of May 2022). The 
Western Blots were run twice and the mean ratios ± SD obtained from each Blot are shown. The black dotted lines highlight the effect of c-MIM-1 compared with Veh.

c-MIM-2 Displays Anti-Inflammatory Effects in Human Primary Monocytes Exposed to 
Lipopolysaccharide
The role of TNF-α as a mediator of chronic inflammation,36 as well as the capacity of PGE2 in exacerbating the severity 
of  the  inflammatory-mediated  diseases,16  both  attest  to  the  necessity  for  a  better  understanding  of  the  effect  of  these 
factors when included in MI formulation at ULD. Interestingly, c-MIM-2 rightly contains PGE2 at the inhibitory dose of 
200 K, altogether with TNF-α and IL-1β at 17 CH, IL-6 at 9 CH, and the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 at 4 CH. In 
order to assess the ability of c-MIM-2 to act as an anti-inflammatory agent, and in particular, in reducing the secretion of 
TNF-α and PGE2, a cellular model of human primary monocytes inflamed with LPS was chosen. One of the reasons for 
this model’s  selection  relies  on the  fact that  monocytes exposed  to LPS  produce  high  levels  of  TNF-α,37  and  PGE2,38 
making them a suitable model to test the capacity of c-MIM-2 to down-regulate their expression.

The followed protocol is illustrated in Figure 6A but, briefly, the cells were isolated from three different donors and 
then incubated with either Veh. or c-MIM-2. The inflammatory stimulus was delivered to the cells in the form of a 10 ng/ 
mL  LPS  threat,  30  minutes  after  the  initiation  of  the  treatment.  The  treatments  were  applied  for  24  hours  and  the 
secretion of the pro-inflammatory factors TNF-α and PGE2 was evaluated within the SN by ELISA assay. The results are 
presented  in  Figure  6B–E  either  as  a  percentage  of  the  cytokine  secretion  in  the  untreated  Ct  (-)  condition,  or  as 
a percentage of the cytokine secretion in the Veh. condition, these latter being set as 100% for each tested cytokine. As 
expected, LPS stimulation led to a drastic increase in TNF-α secretion compared with the untreated negative control Ct 
(-) (Figure 6B), thus validating our model selection. In these inflammatory conditions, c-MIM-2 led to a reduction in the 
TNF-α secretion of about 20% (Figure 6C) compared with the Veh. In the same manner, after LPS stimulation, which led 
to a high increase in the basal secretion of PGE2, c-MIM-2 induced a decrease in the secretion of PGE2 of about 30% 
(Figure  6D).  Finally,  as  c-MIM-2  contains  IL-1β  at  17  CH  and  IL-10  at  4  CH,  the  secretion  levels  of  these  two  other 
cytokines  were  also appraised  in  the  same  conditions.  However,  while  c-MIM-2  did  not  affect  IL-1β,  the  IL-10  levels 
were below the ELISA’s detection limit in all tested conditions (data not shown).

c-MIM-3 Displays Modulatory Effects on Interleukin-6 Secretion in 
Lipopolysaccharide-Exposed Human Macrophages and Granulocytes
Human macrophages exposed to LPS markedly produce pro-inflammatory cytokines such as the pleiotropic cytokine IL-6.39 The 
next experiment thus aimed at assessing if c-MIM-3 could modulate the secretion of IL-6 in a model of LPS-inflamed human 

6706

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

Figure 6 C-MIM-2 diminished the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines in human primary monocytes. (A) Experimental scheme for the cytokines secretion assessment 
in presence of c-MIM-2. Human primary monocytes were treated during 24 hours with either Veh. or c-MIM-2. LPS (10 ng/mL) was added to the medium 30 minutes after 
the treatment initiation, as an induced or the inflammatory conditions. The levels of secreted (B and C) TNF-α and (D and E) PGE2 were assessed in the culture media at 
the end of the incubation time by ELISA assay. The results are presented as the mean percentage ± SD of the values obtained for each donor. Each condition was performed 
in triplicate for each donor (3 donors) and in duplicate for the LPS conditions. The results are presented either as a percentage of the Ct (-) secretion or as a percentage of 
the Veh. secretion (set at 100%). The black dotted lines highlight the effect of c-MIM-2 compared with Veh. 
Abbreviation: SN, supernatants.

macrophages. The experimental scheme is illustrated in Figure 7A, but briefly, CD14+-cells were isolated from one healthy donor 
and were incubated for 6 days in a macrophage-differentiation medium supplemented with M-CSF 100 ng/mL. At day 6 (D6), 
the cells were treated with 100 ng/mL LPS concomitantly with either the Veh. or c-MIM-3 for a period of 24 hours or 48 hours. 
The amount of IL-6 released in the SN was quantified by ELISA at the end of the two tested incubation periods. As expected, 24 
hours  of  LPS-stimulation  induced  a  drastic  increase  in  the  secretion  of  IL-6  compared  with  the  untreated  control  Ct  (-) 
(Figure 7B). Interestingly, after 24 hours in presence of c-MIM-3, a slight decrease in the amount of IL-6 in the SN was noticed 
(about 10%) compared with the Veh. (Figure 7C). In the same manner, while at 48 hours, the induction of IL-6 secretion due to 
LPS exposure was even more important than the one observed after 24 hours (Figure 7D vs B), the reduction induced by c-MIM- 
3 was also slightly more pronounced (about 15%) after this longer incubation period (Figure 7E vs C).

Finally,  the  effect  of  c-MIM-3  on  the  IL-6  secretion  was  also  assessed  in  a  model  of  human  primary  granulocytes 
isolated from one healthy donor and incubated with either Veh. or c-MIM-3 for 19 hours (Figure 7F). The inflammatory 
stimulus was added one hour after treatment initiation, in the form of 1 µg/mL LPS. The levels of IL-6 were assessed by 
cytometric bead  array (CBA)  at the end of the incubation  period (Figure 7G  and H). As  illustrated in Figure 7G, LPS 
alone elicited a strong IL-6 response when compared with the Ct (-). However, this response was weaker than the one 
observed in macrophages. In this model, the effect of c-MIM-3 on the secretion of this cytokine was barely any different 
from the Veh.

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6707

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

Figure 7 C-MIM-3 modulated the secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines in immune cells. (A) Experimental scheme for the cytokine secretion assessment in presence of 
c-MIM-3. Human primary monocytes were differentiated into macrophages during 6 days and were then treated during 24 hours or during 48 hours with either Veh. or 
c-MIM-3. LPS (100 ng/mL) was added to the medium at the same time, as an inducer or the inflammatory conditions. The secreted levels of IL-6 were measured by ELISA 
assay after (B and C) 24 hours or (D and E) 48 hours. The results are presented as the mean percentage ± SD of the values obtained for each triplicate per condition (n = 6 
for  the  LPS  conditions). The  untreated negative control  (Ct (-))  or  the  Veh.  conditions  are set  at  100%.  (F)  Experimental  scheme  for  the  IL-6  secretion  assessment  in 
presence of c-MIM-3. Human primary granulocytes freshly isolated from one healthy donor were seeded in 48-wells plates and pre-incubated during one hour in presence of 
either the Veh. or c-MIM-3. LPS (1 µg/mL) was then added to the medium, as an inducer of the inflammatory conditions. The secreted levels of IL-6 were measured by CBA 
18 hours later. The secreted levels of IL-6 were evaluated after stimulation with LPS alone (G), and in presence of either the Veh. or c-MIM-3 (H). The results are presented 
as the mean percentage ± SD of the values obtained for each triplicate. For each panel, the black dotted lines highlight the effect of c-MIM-2 and c-MIM-3 compared with Veh. 
Abbreviation: SN, supernatants.

6708

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

c-MIM-4 Displays Anti-Inflammatory Effects in a Cellular Model of Neuronal 
Inflammation
The following part of this study aimed at considering the effects of c-MIM-4 in a neuronal model of inflammation. In 
order to do so, rat cortical neurons and glial cells were cultured in presence of a combination of LPS (100 ng/mL)/IFN-γ 
(10 ng/mL), to provide an inflammatory stimulus, and treated during 96 hours with either the Veh., c-MIM-4 or MK801, 
an  antagonist  of  N-methyl-D-aspartate  (NMDA)  receptor  that  has  antidepressant-like  effects,  used  as  a  reference 
compound for neuron protection.40  The cell survival was assessed after immune-staining with an anti-MAP-2 antibody, 
which  is  specific  for  neurons.  The  TNF-α  release  was  investigated,  too.  The  experimental  scheme  is  illustrated  in 
Figure 8A.

The  results  about  neuronal  viability  are  presented  in  Figure  8B.  As  illustrated,  the  inflammatory  stimulus,  applied 
during  72  hours,  induced  a  decrease  in  cortical  neurons  survival  compared  with  the  control  condition  (about  40%  of 

Figure 8 C-MIM-4 displays anti-inflammatory effects in a cellular model of neuronal inflammation. (A) Representative scheme of the experimental protocol. Briefly, rat glial 
cells (astrocytes/microglial cells) and rat cortical neurons were co-cultured during 8 days before treatment initiation with either Veh., c-MIM-4, or MK801 (20 µM). The 
treatments were applied for 24 hours, before adding or not LPS (100 ng/mL)/IFN-γ (10 ng/mL) for an additional 24 hours. At this time, supernatants (SN) were harvested 
and frozen for further ELISA analysis. The tested items ± LPS/IFN-γ were incubated another 48 hours before neurons survival analysis. The latter was performed after cell 
fixation, permeabilization and staining with a monoclonal anti-microtubule associated protein 2 (MAP-2) antibody, specific towards neuron cell bodies and neurites. Images of 
each culture wells were taken and the fluorescence was quantified. BDNF, brain-derived neurotrophic factor; FCS, fetal calf serum; PS, penicillin – streptomycin. (B) Effect of 
a 96 hours c-MIM-4 treatment on rat primary cortical neurons survival, in presence of LPS (100 ng/mL)/IFN-γ (10 ng/mL), expressed in percentage of control medium. The 
results are presented as the mean ± SD of n = 6 technical replicates. (C) Effect of a 48 hours treatment by c-MIM-4 on TNF-α release by astrocytes and microglial cells, 
expressed as percentages of control medium (mean ± SD of n = 6 technical replicates). In this experiment, the cells were pre-incubated during 24 hours with either Veh., 
c-MIM-4 or MK801, then LPS (100 ng/mL)/IFN-γ (10 ng/mL) was added for an additional 24 hours. The black dotted lines highlight the effect of c-MIM-4 compared with the 
Veh.

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6709

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

cellular death; Figure 8B, red histogram vs white histogram). As expected, the reference molecule, MK801, at 20 µM, 
applied during the entire 96 hours incubation period, restored the survival of neurons to a level that is comparable to the 
uninflamed, untreated control (about 95% of neuron survival, Figure 8B, white, red, and green histograms). Interestingly, 
while  the  Veh.  did  not  seem  to  impact  cellular  viability  (Figure  8B,  grey  histogram  vs  red  histogram),  treatment  with 
c-MIM-4 was able to rescue neurons from cell death (about 90% of cell survival, Figure 8B, pink histogram).

The  effect  of  c-MIM-4  on  the  release  of  TNF-α  by  reactive  glial  cells  (astrocytes  and  microglia  cells)  was  also 
appraised  after  48  hours  of  c-MIM-4  treatment  (Figure  8A).  As  observed  in  Figure  8C,  the  inflammatory  stimulus 
induced an increase of about 40% in the TNF-α secretion by activated glial cells, compared to the control medium. Veh. 
and  MK801  (20  µM),  both  displayed  similar  effects  on  TNF-α  secretion,  by  slightly  decreasing  it  compared  to  the 
inflammatory control medium. Interestingly, treatment with c-MIM-4 decreased the TNF-α release by activated glial cells 
by about 10% compared with the Veh. conditions (Figure 8C, grey histogram vs pink histogram). Taken together, these 
results  illustrate  for  the  first  time,  the  anti-inflammatory  potential  of  the  complex  MI  formulation  c-MIM-4,  and  its 
positive role in neuro-protection in a context of LPS/IFN-γ-induced threat.

The  cell  survival  was  finally  assessed  in  absence  of  inflammation  in  the  same  cells.  As  showed  in  Supplementary 
Figure S3, the treatment did not affect the neuronal viability, thus suggesting that the tested MI formulation only acts in 
homeostatic-disrupted models of neuronal cells.

Discussion
In this study, we focused our attention on several MIMs which, based on their compositions, and according to previous 
published  works,4,9,10  may  exert  anti-inflammatory  effects  in  different  specific  inflammatory  contexts  (Figure  2).  With 
this in mind, the body of data that we provide here particularly resonates with one of our works, in which we reported 
that the two unitary medicines TNF-α (27 CH) and IL-1β (27 CH) displayed the capacity to inhibit the secretion of IL-1β 
and TNF-α, in a model of human primary monocytes as well as in THP-1 cells, after LPS exposure.9

Here,  the  same  unitary  MI  medicines  IL-1β  (27  CH)  and  TNF-α  (27  CH)  (referred  to  as  u-MIM-1  and  −2, 
respectively)  were  assessed  for  their  anti-inflammatory  capacities  in  a  model  of  intestinal  inflammation.  The  HT-29 
cell line was thus used, due  to the  fact that  these human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells of  epithelial morphology are 
widely  used  as  an  in  vitro  model  to  study  absorption,  transport,  and  secretion  by  intestinal  cells.41,42  Under  standard 
culture conditions, these cells grow as a nonpolarized, undifferentiated multilayer. At basal levels, without inflammation, 
our  results  show that  they  express  mRNA  of  both  IL-1β and  TNF-α,  the amount  of  TNF-α being  more than  ten  times 
higher than the one of IL-1β (Figure 3B and C). Surprisingly, in their study, Eckmann et al were only able to detect IL-1β 
mRNA but no TNF-α in these cells.43 Interestingly, in TNF-α-stimulated conditions, our model showed an increase in the 
transcription of TNF-α, thus suggesting an auto-amplificatory effect of this cytokine on its own expression. Even if such 
effect was already highlighted in TNF-α-treated 3T3-L1 adipocytes and in TNF-α-injected C57BL/6J mice,44 it is, to the 
best of our knowledge, the first time that such an auto-inducive effect of TNF-α was reported in a colonic epithelial cell 
model. In any event, in this model of inflamed HT-29 cells, both u-MIM-1 and u-MIM-2, when employed at 27 CH, were 
able  to  down-regulate  mRNA  levels  of  IL-1β  and  TNF-α  (Figure  3B  and  C).  These  results  let  us  assume  that  c-MIM 
formulations including these two factors at ULD could display interesting anti-inflammatory properties.

The  intestine  is  the  largest  barrier  to  the  external  environment  and  preserving  its  integrity  is  crucial  for  the  whole- 
body  homeostasis.  Cytokines  are  known  to  play  an  important  role  in  maintaining  intestinal  homeostasis  as  they 
coordinate  diverse  functions  of  the  intestinal  epithelium  (proliferation,  viability,  barrier  permeability),  as  well  as  they 
orchestrate the communication between intestinal cells and resident immune cells.45  In particular, multiple studies have 
revealed  the  protective  effects  of  IL-10  in  maintaining  a  healthy  intestinal  epithelium  and  a  good  balance  between 
permeability and barrier functions.46–48  The observed effects of c-MIM-1 in our in vitro intestinal model, which, alone, 
could  limit  the  barrier  disruption  induced  by  the  pro-inflammatory  cocktail  provided  by  SN  from  PHA-stimulated 
PBMCs (Figure 4), are in line with these pieces of evidence. It should also be noted that c-MIM-1 employs LD of IL- 
10  together  with  ULD  of  IL-1β,  TNF-α,  and  IL-8.  These  three  pro-inflammatory  cytokines  are  involved  in  both  the 
initiation  and  the  progression  of  the  inflammatory  environment  which  leads  to  intestinal  injury,  increased  intestinal 
permeability, and the development of intestinal inflammatory-related diseases.14,49,50 Counteracting the elevated levels of 

6710

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

pro-inflammatory  cytokines  in  the  intestine  may  be  a  valid  therapeutic  solution  in  various  intestinal  inflammatory 
disorders.33,51  Keeping in mind that c-MIM-1’s formulation includes ULD of the pro-inflammatory factors TNF-α, IL- 
1β,  and  IL-8,  it  is  important  to  consider  that  their  ULD  employ  may  have  downregulated  the  physiological/biological 
effects  of  these  cytokines,  helping  in  restoring  the  epithelial  permeability  and  the  tight  junctions’  proteins’  expression 
impaired by the inflammatory condition induced in vitro. Precisely, while additional studies are necessary to confirm the 
beneficial effects of c-MIM-1 and to understand its mode of action, our results revealed that it could act on claudin-1, as 
it slightly increased its expression, both at mRNA and at protein levels (Figure 5).

Previous pieces of evidence have indeed demonstrated that inflammatory stimuli, such as TNF-α exposure, lead to the 
reduction of claudin-1 expression and an altered epithelial permeability.52 Moreover, Maria-Ferreira et al also reported that 
IL-1β treatment led to a decrease in claudin-1 protein expression in Caco-2 cells.53 Although no direct evidence of the role 
of IL-8 in claudin-1 regulation has been reported yet, this cytokine was however demonstrated to exert an inhibitory effect 
towards the mRNA expression of claudin-5 and occludin, in a dose- and in a time-dependent fashion, in endothelial cells.54 
On the other hand, c-MIM-1 also contains LD of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, with the intention to stimulate the 
conventional  cellular  responses  to  this  cytokine.  While  the  relationship  between  IL-10  and  claudin-1  still  needs  to  be 
refined, it was reported that claudin-1 localization was altered in liver cells from a model of IL-10-knocked-out mice, in 
which  colitis  was  induced  with  dinitrobenzene  sulfonic  acid.55  Altogether,  these  data  let  us  presume  that  the  effect  of 
c-MIM-1 on claudin-1 expression (Figure 5) could be attributable to the presence of TNF-α, IL-1β and IL-8 in ULD in its 
formulation,  as  well  as  IL-10  at  LD,  and  highlight  the  fact  that  a  deeper  analysis  of  c-MIM-1’s  global  effect  on  the 
expression of tight junctions’ proteins could be envisioned in the future.

Regarding  the  interconnection  between  the  gut  and  the  immune  axis,  and  taking  into  consideration  the  crucial 
involvement of pro-inflammatory cytokines in IBD, our results about the effects of c-MIM-2 on the secretion of TNF- 
α and PGE2 in an LPS-stimulated human primary monocyte model are quite encouraging (Figure 6C, E). It has indeed 
been  reported  that  TNF  initiated  different  and  redundant  cellular  cascades  participating  in  IBD  development.  In 
particular, TNF was shown to contribute to the generation of an IL-12 and IFN-γ-driven Th1-like response, and to the 
activation of a pathogenic CD8+  T cell compartment, in the TnfΔARE  IBD mouse model, supporting the link between gut 
and  immunity.56  Moreover,  not  only  PGE2  is  involved  in  the  regulation  of  immune-related  patterns,57  but  it  was  also 
shown  to  be  involved  in  IBD  development  in  mice,  especially  through  its  regulatory  effect  towards  the  IL-17/IL-23 
axis.58  The  observed  reduction  in  the  secretion  of  these  two  factors,  TNF-α  and  PGE2,  after  c-MIM-2  treatment, 
suggested the possible direct involvement of the two active substances, TNF-α (17 CH) and PGE2 (200 K), respectively. 
In addition, such secretion’s reduction also suggested the involvement of IL-1β (17 CH), as IL-1β is directly implicated 
in  the  TNF-α  gene  expression  in  a  PKC-dependent  manner,59  and  in  PGE2  expression  through  cAMP-PKA  signaling 
pathway.60

Given  the  importance  of  IL-6  in  inflammatory  responses  and  inflammatory-mediated  diseases,  including  IBD,  our 
research  focused  on  this  cytokine.  It  has  been  reported  that  cultures  of  isolated  lamina  propria  mononuclear  cells  and 
mucosal tissues from IBD patients exhibited higher IL-6 activity than healthy controls.61  This study also suggested that 
the local elevation of IL-6 activity could be a characteristic of active IBD and that, macrophages and colonic epithelial 
cells could be the responsible cells for this phenomenon. In this regard, our results showing a reduction of the levels of 
IL-6  secretion  in  c-MIM-3-treated  inflamed-macrophages  (Figure  7C,  7E),  are  quite  encouraging  and  highlight  the 
potential  of  c-MIM-3  to  be  used  to  decrease  the  inflammation  in  pathologies  such  as  IBD.  Moreover,  preclinical  and 
clinical research studies support the fact that circulating levels of IL-6 are also elevated in several chronic inflammation- 
mediated diseases other than IBD, like rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, ankylosing spondylitis, and 
psoriasis.62 Thus, even if more studies are needed, these data could open the anti-inflammatory action’s scope of c-MIM- 
3 to various pathological conditions related to inflammation in the future. On another hand, the different extents in IL-6 
inhibition observed after c-MIM-3 treatment in macrophages and in granulocytes (Figure 7C, E, and H) confirmed the 
necessity of an in-depth understanding of how MIM’s formulations work, especially towards immune-populations. At the 
moment, it can be speculated that the effect of c-MIM-3 on the two assessed models could have depended on the degree 
of IL-6 release induced by the inflammatory stimulus. The results obtained in our study suggest that the inhibitory effect 
of c-MIM-3 on IL-6 occurs when the levels of IL-6 are very important (Figure B, D, and G). One of the limitations of the 

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6711

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

analysis here is that the experimental protocols were not exactly the same between the two models and further studies are 
definitely  needed  in  order  to  compare  the  responses  of  the  immune  cells  regarding  c-MIM-3  treatment,  at  different 
extents of inflammation.

Finally,  it  is  also  important  to  highlight  that  c-MIM-3  employs  IL-6  at  9  CH,  and  this  dilution  belongs  to  the 
modulatory dilutions of ULD-based MIM. While further studies aiming at assessing the cellular effects of unitaries MIM 
employing modulatory ULD are necessary, this study discusses for the first time the results of a complex MIM that uses 
a cytokine at 9 CH, on its own secretion.

In their work, Mizuno et al reported the direct effect of IFN-γ on neurons; as they observed the formation of dendritic 
beads containing proteins from collapsed cytoskeletal structures mediating neuronal dysfunctions, without increasing cell 
death.63  However,  when  IFN-γ  is  combined  with  pro-inflammatory  cytokines,  including  TNF-α,  the  neurotoxicity  is 
exacerbated and neurons viability decreases.64  Coherently with these previous pieces of evidence, the neuronal inflam-
matory model used in the present study, that combined LPS and IFN-γ, induced an important neurotoxicity (Figure 8). 
However, the tested c-MIM-4 formulation was able to almost rescue the neuronal viability and slightly reduce the release 
of TNF-α. Thus, it can reasonably be hypothesized that the observed c-MIM-4’s effect on neuronal cytotoxicity reduction 
could be due, at least partially, to the presence of ULD of TNF-α in its formulation, as this active ingredient may also be 
the direct mediator of the observed c-MIM-4’ effect on TNF-α secretion. Moreover, the ULD of IL-12 in its formulation 
may  also  have  had  an  effect  on  the  reduction  in  the  TNF-α  secretion,  as  it  was  reported  that  IL-12p40  monomer  and 
homodimer  induced  TNF-α  production  in  mouse  BV-2  microglial  cells,  mouse  primary  microglia  and  peritoneal 
macrophages.65

The research at the frontiers of immunology and neuroscience has identified multiple points of convergence between 
the  immune  system  and  the  nervous  system.  Thanks  to  the  overall  molecular  mechanistic  studies  on  this  concern,  the 
knowledge about the neuro-immune interactions has advanced greatly. Nowadays, a growing body of evidences supports 
that,  pro-inflammatory  cytokines  such  as  TNF-α  and  IL-1β,  and  the  clinical  situation  related  to  their  uncontrolled 
overexpression,  also  referred  as  chronic  inflammation,  are  extremely  linked  with  the  establishment  of  pathological/ 
chronic pain.66  Pain is considered chronic and pathological when it lasts at least 3 months.67  It has been demonstrated 
that sensory neurons express cytokine receptors, including IL-1βR, TNF-αR, IL-6R, and G protein-coupled receptors for 
serotonin,  histamine,  and  PGE2.68,69  Activation  of  these  receptors  expressed  by  nearby  nociceptive  neurons  leads  to 
enhanced membrane excitability and sensitization, which in turn, induce an over the responsiveness of those neurons, and 
the consequent development of pathological pain.69 Downregulating these pro-inflammatory mediators may represent the 
key strategy to improve chronic inflammation and the related pain. The therapeutic potentials of the MI formulations, by 
reducing the secretion of TNF-α and IL-1β, and/or PGE2, and/or IL-6, can indeed cover a very large spectrum of chronic- 
inflammatory mediated illness and conditions.

Visceral  pain  is  one  of  the  major  impediments  of  IBD,  as  it  highly  affects  patients’  quality  of  life.  Interestingly, 
neutralization  of  TNF-α  was  reported  to  rapidly  decrease  pain  perception  in  the  brain  of  patients  with  Crohn's  disease 
responding  to  anti-TNF  therapy.70  Moreover,  the  role  of  TNF-α  and  satellite  glial  cells’  activation  in  neuron-glial 
communication  has  been  highlighted  in  the  context  of  inflammatory  visceral  hyperalgesia,  in  a  model  of  rat-induced 
colonic inflammation in which intrathecal administration of anti-TNF-α (10 µg/kg/day) reduced visceral pain behavioral 
responses.71  With  this  data  in  mind,  reducing  TNF-α  secretion  through  the  use  of  the  MI  formulation  c-MIM-4  could 
allow acting on TNF-α-mediated neuron-glial communication axis, which may result in antinociceptive effects in IBD.
As  we  developed  all  along  the  article,  the  three  different  inflammation  contexts  and  models  used  are  all  intercon-
nected together as the gut, the immune cells, and the nervous axis are constantly communicating between them. To cite 
some examples, several studies suggest that peripheral inflammation linked to IBD could also be a potential risk factor 
for  certain  neurodegenerative  disorders.  For  instance,  ulcerative  colitis  has  been  reported  to  exacerbate  LPS-induced 
damage to the nigral dopaminergic system.72  As another example, a clinical study carried out in patients suffering from 
rheumatoid  arthritis  (a  chronic  inflammatory  and  autoimmune  disease),  demonstrated  the  efficacy  of  electrical  vagus 
nerve stimulation in attenuating the symptoms and significantly inhibiting circulating levels of TNF, IL-1β, and IL-6.73
Another  important  consideration  that  can  finally  be  developed  is  about  the  reported  comorbidity  of  depression  and 
chronic  pain  and  the  possibility  that  inflammation  is  the  common  mediator  of  this  comorbidity.74  Preclinical  studies 

6712

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

demonstrated  that  intracerebroventricular  injections  of  proinflammatory  cytokines  such  as  TNF-α  and  IL-1β  were 
sufficient  to  produce  depressive-like  behaviors  in  rats,75  highlighting  the  crucial  role  of  these  two  key  cytokines,  in 
neuronal inflammation and the related depression.

Conclusion
Overall,  the  present  study  highlighted  the  anti-inflammatory  effects  of  several  MIM  preparations,  which  all  include  in 
their formulations ULD of IL-1β and TNF-α, in three different contexts of inflammation. The main results of this study 
are thus put together and illustrated in Figure 9 and could be summarized as this: MI formulations containing ULD of IL- 
1β  and  TNF-α  displayed  anti-inflammatory  effects  in  several  models  of  inflammation  related  to  the  (i)  intestinal 
inflammation,  (ii)  immune-cells  mediated-systemic  inflammation  and,  (iii)  neuronal  inflammation,  and  could  all  be 
linked  together  in  an  attempt  to  control  the  inflammation  within  the  body.  In  conclusion,  it  can  be  said  that  u-MIM-1 
and −2 down-regulated the mRNA expression of both IL-1β and TNF-α in an in vitro model of intestinal inflammation. 
In the same cellular model, under inflammatory conditions mimicked by incubation with SN from PHA-treated PBMCs, 
c-MIM-1  allowed  a  restoration  of  the  epithelial  resistance,  probably  due  to  an  increase  in  the  expression  of  the  tight 

Figure 9 Recapitulative scheme about the anti-inflammatory effects of IL-1β and TNF-α, when employed at ULD in MI medicines formulations. The two unitary medicines 
IL-1β  (27  CH)  and  TNF-α  (27  CH)  (u-MIM-1,  and  −2,  respectively),  as  well  as  the  four  MI  complex  formulations  (c-MIM-1,  −2,  −3,  and  −4)  display  anti-inflammatory 
properties in the context of (i) intestinal inflammation (red box), (ii) inflamed-immune cells related to systemic inflammation (blue box), and (iii) neuronal inflammation 
(yellow box) contexts. Purple arrows illustrate the fact that IL-1β and TNF-α are included into MI formulations, either in u-MIM or in c-MIM. Green arrows illustrate the 
interconnexions between the different inflammatory contexts (i), (ii) and (iii). 
Abbreviations: MI, micro-immunotherapy; ULD, ultra-low dose.

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6713

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

junctions’ protein, claudin-1. In addition, MIM-2 and −3 were shown to decrease the secretion of the pro-inflammatory 
factors TNF-α, PGE2, and IL-6 in LPS-stimulated monocytes/macrophages. Finally, c-MIM-4 was able to restore the cell 
viability of murine primary neurons inflamed with a combination of LPS/IFN-γ, while reducing their TNF-α secretion. 
Even if more data are definitely needed, these results highlight for the first time that MI formulations may be a useful 
strategy to manage a large spectrum of inflammation-related diseases, including IBD or depression.

Abbreviations
BDNF,  brain-derived  neurotrophic factor; CBA,  cytometric  bead  array; CH,  centesimal Hahnemannian;  DNA,  deoxyr-
ibonucleic acid; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; EFS, Etablissement Français du Sang; F, forward; FBS, 
fetal  bovine  serum;  FCS,  fetal  calf  serum;  GAPDH,  glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate  dehydrogenase;  GI,  gastro-intestinal 
tract; HBSS, Hank’s buffered saline solution; HLA, human leukocyte antigen; hr, human recombinant; IBD, inflamma-
tory bowel diseases; IFN, interferon; ILs, interleukins; K, Korsakovian dilution; LD, low dose; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; 
MAP-2,  microtubule-associated  protein  2;  MCH,  major  histocompatibility  complex;  M-CSF,  macrophage  colony- 
stimulating  factor;  MI,  micro-immunotherapy;  MIM,  micro-immunotherapy  medicine;  NDMA,  N-methyl-D-aspartate; 
OSM, oncostatin M; PBMCs, peripheral blood mononuclear cells; PBS, phosphate buffer saline; PHA, phytohemagglu-
tinin;  PMSF,  phenylmethyl  sulfonyl  fluoride;  P/S,  penicillin/streptomycin;  PVDF,  polyvinylidene  fluoride;  R,  reverse; 
RNA,  ribonucleic  acid;  RT,  room  temperature;  SD,  standard  deviation;  SKP,  serial  kinetic  process;  SN,  supernatant; 
SNA®, specific nucleic acids; TBS, tris-buffered saline; TEER, transepithelial electrical resistance; TGF-β, transforming 
growth factor-β; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-α; ULD, ultra-low dose; Veh, vehicle.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to the staff of  Intestinal Biotech Development (especially Pierre Desreumaux, Nghiep Truong 
Tan,  and  Christel  Rousseaux),  for  their  work  in  performing  the  experiments  of  the  in  vitro  study  on  the  intestinal 
inflammatory model. The authors would like to thank the staff of Atlantic Bone Screen, especially Mathieu Riffault for 
his work on the evaluation of the cytokine secretion in monocytes, Emilie Schol and Adrien Brulefert (QIMA Sciences), 
for having supervised the in vitro experiments on the evaluation of the cytokine secretion in granulocytes and Kurt Appel 
(VivaCell  Biotechnology  GmbH)  for  having  supervised  the  in  vitro  experiments  on  the  LPS-inflamed  primary  mono-
cytes. The authors would also like to thank Neuron Experts, and especially Remy Steinschneider, for having supervised 
the experiments done in the neuronal inflammatory model as well as Jean-Claude Santiago Michea and Mourad Ouamer 
for  having  performed  the  experiments  with  neurons  and  the  image  analysis,  respectively.  The  authors  wish  to  thank 
Nicoletta Libera Lilli and Beatrice Lejeune  for their  substantial contribution to the conception  and management of the 
in vitro studies on the intestinal and neuronal inflammatory models. The authors would like to thank Anne Naedts, Cédric 
Wolf, Coralie Lhots, Virginie Reynders, Sylvain D’Hooghe, and David Wilders for having prepared, provided and sent 
the vehicle and the tested MI medicines to the laboratories. The authors would also like to thank Cloé Azarias, Dr. Pascal 
Mensah, and Sofia Frau for their help in revising the manuscript. The authors finally thank Servier Medical Art (https:// 
smart.servier.com/, accessed on 04/07/2022) for the items used in the figures.

Author Contributions
All  authors  made  a  significant  contribution  to  the  work  reported,  whether  that  is  in  the  conception,  study  design, 
execution, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation, or in all these areas; took part in drafting, revising or critically 
reviewing the article; gave final approval of the version to be published; have agreed on the journal to which the article 
has been submitted; and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work. The data of the current study are available 
from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Funding
This study was entirely funded by Labo’Life France.

6714

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

Disclosure
The authors declared the following conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article, Camille Jacques and Ilaria Floris work for Labo’Life France, the company service provider of Labo’Life, which 
is specialized in preclinical research and regulatory affairs. This professional relationship does not imply any misconduct 
on the part of the authors.

References

1. Pahwa R, Goyal A, Jialal I. Chronic Inflammation. In: StatPearls. StatPearls Publishing; 2022.
2. Wu R-Q, Zhang D-F, Tu E, Chen Q-M, Chen W. The mucosal immune system in the oral cavity—an orchestra of T cell diversity. Int J Oral Sci. 

2014;6:125–132. doi:10.1038/ijos.2014.48

3. Mowat AM, Agace WW. Regional specialization within the intestinal immune system. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014;14:667–685. doi:10.1038/nri3738
4. Floris  I,  García-González  V,  Palomares  B,  Appel  K,  Lejeune  B.  The  micro-immunotherapy  medicine  2LARTH®  reduces  inflammation  and 

symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis in vivo. Int J Rheumatol. 2020;2020:1594573. doi:10.1155/2020/1594573

5. Floris  I,  Chenuet  P,  Togbe  D,  Volteau  C,  Lejeune  B.  Potential  role  of  the  micro-immunotherapy  medicine  2LALERG  in  the  treatment  of 

pollen-induced allergic inflammation. Dose-Response Publ Int Hormesis Soc. 2020;18:1559325820914092.

6. Jacques C, Chatelais M, Fekir K, et al. The micro-immunotherapy medicine 2LEID exhibits an immunostimulant effect by boosting both innate and 

adaptive immune responses. Int J Mol Sci. 2022;23:110. doi:10.3390/ijms23010110

7. Jacques  C,  Chatelais  M,  Fekir  K,  Brulefert  A,  Floris  I.  The  unitary  micro-immunotherapy  medicine  interferon-γ  (4  CH)  displays  similar 
immunostimulatory  and  immunomodulatory  effects  than  those  of  biologically  active  human  interferon-γ  on  various  cell  types.  Int  J  Mol  Sci. 
2022;23:2314. doi:10.3390/ijms23042314

8. Decker M-L, Gotta V, Wellmann S, Ritz N. Cytokine profiling in healthy children shows association of age with cytokine concentrations. Sci Rep. 

2017;7:17842. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-17865-2

9. Floris I, Rose T, Rojas JA, et al. Pro-inflammatory cytokines at ultra-low dose exert anti-inflammatory effect in vitro, A possible mode of action 

involving sub-micron particles? Dose-Response Publ Int Hormesis Soc. 2020;18:1559325820961723.

10. Floris I, Appel K, Rose T, Lejeune B. 2LARTH®, a micro-immunotherapy medicine, exerts anti-inflammatory effects in vitro and reduces TNF-α 

and IL-1β secretion. J Inflamm Res. 2018;11:397–405. doi:10.2147/JIR.S174326

11. Jacques C, Floris I, Lejeune B. Ultra-low dose cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis, three birds with one stone as the rationale of the 2LARTH® micro- 

immunotherapy treatment. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22:6717. doi:10.3390/ijms22136717

12. Bennett  JM,  Reeves  G,  Billman  GE,  Sturmberg  JP.  Inflammation-nature’s  way  to  efficiently  respond  to  all  types  of  challenges.  Implications  for 

understanding and managing ‘the epidemic’ of chronic diseases. Front Med. 2018;5:316.

13. Jacobson  A,  Yang  D,  Vella  M,  Chiu  IM.  The  intestinal  neuro-immune  axis,  crosstalk  between  neurons,  immune  cells,  and  microbes.  Mucosal 

Immunol. 2021;14:555–565. doi:10.1038/s41385-020-00368-1

14. Cotton  JA,  Platnich  JM,  Muruve  DA,  et  al.  Interleukin-8  in  gastrointestinal  inflammation  and  malignancy,  induction  and  clinical  consequences. 

Int J Interferon Cytokine Mediat Res. 2016;8:13–34.

15. Kumar  S,  Shukla  R,  Ranjan  P,  Kumar  A.  Interleukin-10,  A  compelling  therapeutic  target  in  patients  with  irritable  bowel  syndrome.  Clin  Ther. 

2017;39:632–643. doi:10.1016/j.clinthera.2017.01.030

16. Tsuge  K,  Inazumi  T,  Shimamoto  A,  Sugimoto  Y.  Molecular  mechanisms  underlying  prostaglandin  E2-exacerbated  inflammation  and  immune 

diseases. Int Immunol. 2019;31:597–606. doi:10.1093/intimm/dxz021

17. Couper  KN,  Blount  DG,  Riley  EM.  IL-10,  the  master  regulator  of  immunity  to  infection.  J  Immunol.  2008;180:5771–5777.  doi:10.4049/ 

jimmunol.180.9.5771

18. Iyer SS, Cheng G. Role of interleukin 10 transcriptional regulation in inflammation and autoimmune disease. Crit Rev Immunol. 2012;32:23–63. 

doi:10.1615/CritRevImmunol.v32.i1.30

19. Li MO, Flavell RA. Contextual regulation of inflammation, a duet by transforming growth factor-β and interleukin-10. Immunity. 2008;28:468–476. 

doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2008.03.003

20. Dinarello  CA,  Simon  A,  van  der  Meer  JWM.  Treating  inflammation  by  blocking  interleukin-1  in  a  broad  spectrum  of  diseases.  Nat  Rev  Drug 

Discov. 2012;11:633–652. doi:10.1038/nrd3800

21. Richards CD. The enigmatic cytokine oncostatin M and roles in disease. ISRN Inflamm. 2013;2013:e512103. doi:10.1155/2013/512103
22. Hirano T. IL-6 in inflammation, autoimmunity and cancer. Int Immunol. 2021;33:127–148. doi:10.1093/intimm/dxaa078
23. Tanaka T, Narazaki M, Kishimoto T. IL-6 in inflammation, immunity, and disease. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014;6:a016295. doi:10.1101/ 

cshperspect.a016295

24. Seyfizadeh N, Seyfizadeh N, Gharibi T, Babaloo Z. Interleukin-13 as an important cytokine, A review on its roles in some human diseases. Acta 

Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2015;62:341–378. doi:10.1556/030.62.2015.4.2

25. Valkanova  V,  Ebmeier  KP,  Allan  CLCRP.  IL-6  and  depression,  a  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  longitudinal  studies.  J  Affect  Disord. 

2013;150:736–744. doi:10.1016/j.jad.2013.06.004

26. Kim Y-K, Suh I-B, Kim H, et al. The plasma levels of interleukin-12 in schizophrenia, major depression, and bipolar mania, effects of psychotropic 

drugs. Mol Psychiatry. 2002;7:1107–1114. doi:10.1038/sj.mp.4001084

27. Park  H-J,  Shim  H-S,  An  K,  et  al.  IL-4  Inhibits  IL-1  β  -induced  depressive-like  behavior  and  central  neurotransmitter  alterations.  Mediators 

Inflamm. 2015;2015:941413. doi:10.1155/2015/941413

28. Singer CA, Figueroa-Masot XA, Batchelor RH, Dorsa DM. The mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway mediates estrogen neuroprotection after 
glutamate toxicity in primary cortical neurons. J Neurosci off J Soc Neurosci. 1999;19:2455–2463. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-07-02455.1999
29. Gresa-Arribas  N,  Viéitez  C,  Dentesano  G,  et  al.  Modelling  neuroinflammation  in  vitro,  a  tool  to  test  the  potential  neuroprotective  effect  of 

anti-inflammatory agents. PLoS One. 2012;7:e45227. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0045227

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                          

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                       

6715

DovePress                                                                                                                       

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Jacques and Floris                                                                                                                                                   

Dovepress

30. Kim  I-D,  Lee  J-K.  HMGB1-binding  heptamer  confers  anti-inflammatory  effects in  primary  microglia  culture.  Exp  Neurobiol.  2013;22:301–307. 

doi:10.5607/en.2013.22.4.301

31. Shu Z, Yang B, Zhao H, et al. Tangeretin exerts anti-neuroinflammatory effects via NF-κB modulation in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated microglial 

cells. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014;19:275–282. doi:10.1016/j.intimp.2014.01.011

32. Vaux DL. Research methods, Know when your numbers are significant. Nature. 2012;492:180–181. doi:10.1038/492180a
33. Friedrich  M,  Pohin  M,  Powrie  F.  Cytokine  networks  in  the  pathophysiology  of  inflammatory  bowel  disease.  Immunity.  2019;50:992–1006. 

doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2019.03.017

34. Lin Z,  Huang  Y,  Jiang H,  et  al.  Functional differences and similarities  in  activated  peripheral blood  mononuclear  cells  by  lipopolysaccharide or 

phytohemagglutinin stimulation between human and cynomolgus monkeys. Ann Transl Med. 2021;9:257. doi:10.21037/atm-20-4548

35. Saeedi BJ, Kao DJ, Kitzenberg DA, et al. HIF-dependent regulation of claudin-1 is central to intestinal epithelial tight junction integrity. Mol Biol 

Cell. 2015;26:2252–2262.

36. Popa  C,  Netea  MG,  Van  Riel  PL,  Van  Der  Meer  JW,  Stalenhoef  AF.  The  role  of  TNF-α  in  chronic  inflammatory  conditions,  intermediary 

metabolism, and cardiovascular risk. J Lipid Res. 2007;48:751–762. doi:10.1194/jlr.R600021-JLR200

37. van der Bruggen T, Nijenhuis S, van Raaij E, Verhoef J, Sweder van Asbeck B. Lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor alpha production 
by  human  monocytes  involves  the  Raf-1/MEK1-MEK2/ERK1-ERK2  Pathway.  Infect  Immun.  1999;67:3824–3829.  doi:10.1128/IAI.67.8.3824- 
3829.1999

38. Lu  Y,  Wahl  LM.  Oxidative  stress  augments  the  production  of  matrix  metalloproteinase-1,  cyclooxygenase-2,  and  prostaglandin  E2  through 
enhancement  of  NF-κB  activity  in  lipopolysaccharide-activated  human  primary  monocytes.  J  Immunol.  2005;175:5423–5429.  doi:10.4049/ 
jimmunol.175.8.5423

39. Liu  X,  Yin  S,  Chen  Y,  et  al.  LPS-induced  proinflammatory  cytokine  expression  in  human  airway  epithelial  cells  and  macrophages  via  NF-κB, 

STAT3 or AP-1 activation. Mol Med Rep. 2018;17:5484–5491. doi:10.3892/mmr.2018.8542

40. Rana  P,  Bagewadi  H,  Banerjee  BD,  Bhattacharya  SK,  Mediratta  PK.  Attenuation  of  oxidative  stress  and  neurotoxicity  involved  in  the 
antidepressant-like  effect  of  the  MK-801(dizocilpine)  in  bacillus  Calmette-Guerin-induced  depression  in  mice.  J  Basic  Clin  Physiol  Pharmacol. 
2020;31. doi:10.1515/jbcpp-2019-0016

41. Collett A, Sims E, Walker D, et al. Comparison of HT29-18-C1 and Caco-2 cell lines as models for studying intestinal paracellular drug absorption. 

Pharm Res. 1996;13:216–221. doi:10.1023/A:1016082829111

42. Martínez-Maqueda  D,  Miralles  B,  Recio  I.  HT29  Cell  Line.  in  the  Impact  of  Food  Bioactives  on  Health,  in  vitro  and  ex  vivo  Models.  eds. 

Verhoeckx K. Springer International Publishing; 2015:113–124. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-16104-4_11

43. Eckmann  L,  Jung  HC,  Schürer-Maly  C,  et  al.  Differential  cytokine  expression  by  human  intestinal  epithelial  cell  lines,  regulated  expression  of 

interleukin 8. Gastroenterology. 1993;105:1689–1697. doi:10.1016/0016-5085(93)91064-O

44. Neels  JG,  Pandey  M,  Hotamisligil  GS,  Samad  F.  Autoamplification  of  tumor  necrosis  factor-α.  Am  J  Pathol.  2006;168:435–444.  doi:10.2353/ 

ajpath.2006.050699

45. Andrews  C,  McLean  MH,  Durum  SK.  Cytokine  Tuning  of  Intestinal  Epithelial  Function.  Front  Immunol.  2018;9:1270.  doi:10.3389/ 

fimmu.2018.01270

46. Kominsky DJ, Campbell EL, Ehrentraut SF, et al. IFN-γ-mediated induction of an apical IL-10 receptor on polarized intestinal epithelia. J Immunol 

Baltim Md. 2014;192:1267–1276.

47. Lorén V, Cabré E, Ojanguren I, et al. Interleukin-10 enhances the intestinal epithelial barrier in the presence of corticosteroids through p38 MAPK 
activity in caco-2 monolayers, A possible mechanism for steroid responsiveness in ulcerative colitis. PLoS One. 2015;10:e0130921. doi:10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0130921

48. Zheng L, Kelly CJ, Battista KD, et al. Microbial-derived butyrate promotes epithelial barrier function through IL-10 receptor-dependent repression 

of claudin-2. J Immunol Baltim Md. 2017;199:2976–2984.

49. Gitter AH, Bendfeldt K, Schmitz H, et al. Epithelial barrier defects in HT-29/B6 colonic cell monolayers induced by tumor necrosis factor-alpha. 

Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000;915:193–203. doi:10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb05242.x

50. Al-Sadi RM, Ma TY. IL-1β causes an increase in intestinal epithelial tight junction permeability. J Immunol Baltim Md. 2007;178:4641–4649.
51. McLean  MH,  Neurath  MF,  Durum  SK.  Targeting  interleukins  for  the  treatment  of  inflammatory  bowel  disease—what  lies  beyond  anti-TNF 

therapy? Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014;20:389–397. doi:10.1097/01.MIB.0000437616.37000.41

52. Ye X, Sun M. AGR2 ameliorates tumor necrosis factor-α-induced epithelial barrier dysfunction via suppression of NF-κB p65-mediated MLCK/ 

p-MLC pathway activation. Int J Mol Med. 2017;39:1206–1214. doi:10.3892/ijmm.2017.2928

53. Maria-Ferreira  D,  Nascimento  AM,  Cipriani  TR,  et  al.  Rhamnogalacturonan,  a  chemically-defined  polysaccharide,  improves  intestinal  barrier 

function in DSS-induced colitis in mice and human Caco-2 cells. Sci Rep. 2018;8:12261. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-30526-2

54. Yu H, Huang X, Ma Y, et al. Interleukin-8 regulates endothelial permeability by down-regulation of tight junction but not dependent on integrins 

induced focal adhesions. Int J Biol Sci. 2013;9:966–979. doi:10.7150/ijbs.6996

55. Mazzon E, Puzzolo D, Caputi AP, Cuzzocrea S. Role of IL-10 in hepatocyte tight junction alteration in mouse model of experimental colitis. Mol 

Med. 2002;8:353–366. doi:10.1007/BF03402016

56. Kontoyiannis D, Boulougouris G, Manoloukos M, et al. Genetic dissection of the cellular pathways and signaling mechanisms in modeled tumor 

necrosis factor-induced Crohn’s-like inflammatory bowel disease. J Exp Med. 2002;196:1563–1574. doi:10.1084/jem.20020281

57. Kalinski P. Regulation of immune responses by prostaglandin E2. J Immunol Baltim Md. 2012;188:21–28.
58. Sheibanie  AF,  Yen  JH,  Khayrullina  T,  et  al.  The  proinflammatory  effect  of  prostaglandin  E2  in  experimental  inflammatory  bowel  disease  is 

mediated through the IL-23–>IL-17 axis. J Immunol Baltim Md. 2007;178:8138–8147.

59. Bethea  JR,  Gillespie  GY,  Benveniste  EN.  Interleukin-1β  induction  of  TNF-α  gene  expression,  Involvement  of  protein  kinase  C.  J  Cell  Physiol. 

1992;152:264–273. doi:10.1002/jcp.1041520207

60. Park  Y-G,  Kang  SK,  Noh  SH,  et  al.  PGE2  induces  IL-1beta  gene  expression  in  mouse  osteoblasts  through  a  cAMP-PKA  signaling  pathway. 

Int Immunopharmacol. 2004;4:779–789.

61. Kusugami K, Fukatsu A, Tanimoto M, et al. Elevation of interleukin-6 in inflammatory bowel disease is macrophage- and epithelial cell-dependent. 

Dig Dis Sci. 1995;40:949–959. doi:10.1007/BF02064182

62. Gabay C. Interleukin-6 and chronic inflammation. Arthritis Res Ther. 2006;8:S3. doi:10.1186/ar1917

6716

https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S389614                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15 

DovePress                                                                                                                                                 

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)Dovepress                                                                                                                                                   

Jacques and Floris

63. Mizuno T, Zhang G, Takeuchi H, et al. Interferon-γ directly induces neurotoxicity through a neuron specific, calcium-permeable complex of IFN-γ 

receptor and AMPA GluRl receptor. FASEB J. 2008;22:1797–1806. doi:10.1096/fj.07-099499

64. Yu Z, Cheng G, Wen X, et al. Tumor necrosis factor alpha increases neuronal vulnerability to excitotoxic necrosis by inducing expression of the 
AMPA-glutamate receptor subunit GluR1 via an acid sphingomyelinase- and NF-kappaB-dependent mechanism. Neurobiol Dis. 2002;11:199–213. 
doi:10.1006/nbdi.2002.0530

65. Jana M, Dasgupta S, Saha RN, Liu X, Pahan K. Induction of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) by interleukin-12 p40 monomer and homodimer in 

microglia and macrophages. J Neurochem. 2003;86:519–528. doi:10.1046/j.1471-4159.2003.01864.x

66. Vanderwall  AG,  Milligan  ED.  Cytokines  in  pain,  harnessing  endogenous  anti-inflammatory  signaling  for  improved  pain  management.  Front 

Immunol. 2019;10:3009.

67. Treede  R-D,  Rief  W,  Barke  A,  et  al.  Chronic  pain  as  a  symptom  or  a  disease,  the  IASP  classification  of  chronic  pain  for  the  international 

classification of diseases (ICD-11). PAIN. 2019;160:19–27. doi:10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001384

68. Chavan  SS,  Pavlov  VA,  Tracey  KJ.  Mechanisms  and  therapeutic  relevance  of  neuro-immune  communication.  Immunity.  2017;46:927–942. 

doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2017.06.008

69. Scholz J, Woolf CJ. The neuropathic pain triad, neurons, immune cells and glia. Nat Neurosci. 2007;10:1361–1368. doi:10.1038/nn1992
70. Hess A, Roesch J, Saake M, et al. Functional brain imaging reveals rapid blockade of abdominal pain response upon anti-TNF therapy in crohn’s 

disease. Gastroenterology. 2015;149:864–866. doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.063

71. Song D, Li Y, Tang D, Huang L, Yuan Y. Neuron-glial communication mediated by TNF-α and glial activation in dorsal root ganglia in visceral 

inflammatory hypersensitivity. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014;306:G788–795. doi:10.1152/ajpgi.00318.2013

72. Villarán RF, Espinosa-Oliva AM, Sarmiento M, et al. Ulcerative colitis exacerbates lipopolysaccharide-induced damage to the nigral dopaminergic 

system, potential risk factor in Parkinson`s disease. J Neurochem. 2010;114:1687–1700. doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06879.x

73. Koopman  FA,  Chavan  SS,  Miljko  S,  et  al.  Vagus  nerve  stimulation  inhibits  cytokine  production  and  attenuates  disease  severity  in  rheumatoid 

arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016;113:8284–8289. doi:10.1073/pnas.1605635113

74. Walker AK, Kavelaars A, Heijnen CJ, Dantzer R. Neuroinflammation and Comorbidity of Pain and Depression. Pharmacol Rev. 2014;66:80–101. 

doi:10.1124/pr.113.008144

75. Connor TJ, Song C, Leonard BE, Merali Z, Anisman H. An assessment of the effects of central interleukin-1β, −2, −6, and tumor necrosis factor-α 
administration on some behavioural, neurochemical, endocrine and immune parameters in the rat. Neuroscience. 1998;84(3):923–933. doi:10.1016/ 
S0306-4522(97)00533-2

Journal of Inflammation Research                                                                                                     

Dovepress 

Publish your work in this journal 

The Journal of Inflammation Research is an international, peer-reviewed open-access journal that welcomes laboratory and clinical findings on 
the  molecular  basis,  cell  biology  and  pharmacology  of  inflammation  including  original  research,  reviews,  symposium  reports,  hypothesis 
formation and commentaries on: acute/chronic inflammation; mediators of inflammation; cellular processes; molecular mechanisms; pharmacology 
and  novel  anti-inflammatory  drugs;  clinical  conditions  involving  inflammation.  The  manuscript  management  system  is  completely  online  and 
includes a very quick and fair peer-review system. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.  

Submit your manuscript here: https://www.dovepress.com/journal-of-inflammation-research-journal

Journal of Inflammation Research 2022:15                                                                                   

DovePress                                                                                                                       

6717

Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)